# We are not at War

All images from [this excellent twitter account](https://twitter.com/RealTimeWWII) unless otherwise noted.

![This is what a city at war looks like](/images/not_at_war/war.jpg)

We are not at war. We are not at war against drugs. We are not at war against
terror. We are not at war against Christmas (and nor is anybody else). If
anything, we are at war against Pakistan and the Taliban, but in reality there
should be another name for actions like these&mdash; maybe "Low intensity
conflict" or "An International Robotic Campaign of Terror," or "Nation
Building," but these are unlike war.

We are not at war because wars are big. War changes what it means to be a
citizen. Wars are terrible. Wars mean we're all in it together. Let's talk
about war. Let's talk about World War II.

Let's talk about food shortages in Britain, and government propaganda encouraging
you to eat more potatoes, or officially sanctioned recipes for carrot
sandwiches. Let's talk about rationing weekly consumption to a paltry table of
meats and dairy, because otherwise there will simply not be enough to last the
winter.

![One Weeks Rations](/images/not_at_war/weeks_rations.jpg)

Let's talk about the Blitz&mdash; the whole city of London pounded with
incendiaries and high explosives. Subway tunnels packed with people lying head
to foot, all of them freezing, hungry, sheltering from the bombs, a nation made
pauper. 

![Tube Station, courtesy of http://www.theatlantic.com/infocus/2011/06/world-war-ii-before-the-war/100089](/images/not_at_war/tube-station.jpg)

Let's talk about occupation. Let's talk about martial law, and curfew, and
severe repercussions for those who would resist. Let's talk about persecution
by a power that is not only *not* the government you would have voted for, but
is also responsible for destroying your existing government, upending the
status quo by force, and whose express purpose is to transfer wealth from your
community to their own. Let's talk about might makes right rather than some
combination of debate and money, in which the consequences of your indiscretion
are public execution rather than public shame.

Let's talk about what persecution means. It's not having to pay for a health
service you would rather not pay for in the case one of your employees
would ask for it. It is not a tax rate applied fairly across your income
bracket. It is not nationally mandated health care.

![Resistors Will be Shot](/images/not_at_war/resistors_shot.jpg)

So the next time you feel inclined to describe political attitudes, police
action, socioeconomic inequality, a global policy priority, or for god's
sake a lack of government recognition for your favorite holiday as a war,
consider what real wars look like. 

Then quiet yourself and reach for a better metaphor.
